Born in Sheffield, Derek Bailey studied music with C.H.C.Biltcliffe and guitar with, amongst others, George Wing and John Duarte. Throughout the 1950s he worked as a guitarist in every kind of musical situation - clubs, concert halls, radio, TV and recording studios. He became increasingly interested in the possibilities of a freely improvised music and by the mid-60s was devoting himself exclusively to this field, He has performed solo concerts in all the major cities of Europe, Japan and North America, played with most of the musicians associated with free improvisation, and recorded over 90 albums on labels including CBS, RCA, Deutsche Grammophon and Island.  in 1970, along with Tony Oxley and Evan Parker, he founded Incus Records, the first independent, musician-owned record company in Britain. In 1976 he established Company, a changing ensemble of improvising musicians drawn from many backgrounds and countries that performs throughout the world. In 1977 an annual Company Week was inaugurated in London. He now divides his time between solo performances, organising and playing in Company events, running Incus, practising, writing and — something he considers essential — ad hoc musical activities.  Improvisation: its nature and practice in music was originally written in 1975/6 and first published in 1980. Translations followed in Italian, French, Japanese, Dutch and German, and it has formed the basis of a series of TV films made by Jeremy Marre and screened in several countries in 1992.  IMPROVISATION  its nature and practice in music  DEREK BAILEY  i dont know what the following paragraph excerpt is:  examining the idea from every angle - being busy with the idea. That’s the whole thing. Looking for each way to come to the middle of it Han Bennink I've always tried to provoke the musician to go beyond his habits Earle Brown the accidental, the chaotic. You know, the stuff that you can’t control or you can’t predict Jerry Garcia it’s something that should be heard, enjoyed or otherwise, and then completely forgotten Stephen Hicks when you start to play off the top of your head, that’s when the truth is really known about people Steve Howe a musician is trying to use whatever liberty he has within the raga to extend the limits of that raga without destroying its basic features Viram Jasani the most important thing for an improvisor is to be able to think quickly Jean Langlais it started from what we accept as silence. And every move meant something Tony Oxley the violinists, and the other string players in the group, spurred the harpsichordist on...the harpsichordist might then think of something first and they would follow him Lionel Salter an improvisor wants to have the freedom to do anything at any time John Zorn the basic characteristic of music-making is improvisation Derek Bailey  Author's Note  This book is an account by practicing musicians from various idioms of their use of improvisation, its place in music and their speculations on its nature. The widespread presence of improvisation in music, combined with a scarcity of documentation concerning it, means that any single volume will inevitably be selective. This is an attempt to cover the practice of improvisation in the main areas in which it is found and to reveal those features and characteristics common to all improvisation.  The book is divided into sections ranging from the traditional uses of improvisation (in Indian music, Flamenco and Baroque music) through its uses in church organ playing, in Jazz and in Rock, its relationship to its audience, its telationship to recording, its uses in the classroom and some of the recent developments involving improvisation in contemporary Western composition. It concludes with an examination of some aspects of the recent rise of free improvisation and the correspondences found between all types of improvisation.