Acknowledgements  The number of people who have helped me with the book from its inception through its various stages and revisions is countless. Primarily, | am indebted to all the musicians whose words I quote in the book. They are the book. But 1 would also like to thank all those musicians whose ideas and words appear without acknowledgement, passages in the book which derive from conversa- tions held with many players over many years.  Among those who helped in a vaciety of other ways, | have particular reasons to thank Alistair Bamford, Mick Beck, Karen Brookman, Peter Butler, Janice Christianson, Chris Clark, George Clinton, Mandy Davidson, Martin Davidson, John Fordham, Charles Fox, Laurent Goddet, Henry Kaiser, Rudy Koopmans, Frank Long, Paul Lytton, Ulla Lytton, Michael Oliver, Peter Riley, Marion Rout, Beryl Towns and Paul Wilson.  My thanks also to Harcourt Films and Channel 4 Television for permission to use certain quotations from the series of TV films based on the earlier edition of this book. Particularly, | am indebted to the director, Jeremy Marre. His perception of the social and spiritual powers of improvisation lead me to a greater understanding of its universal significance.  Introduction  Improvisation enjoys the curious distinction of being both the most widely practised of all musical activities and the least acknowledged and understood. While it is today present in almost every area of music, there is an almost total absence of information about it. Perhaps this is inevitable, even appropriate. Improvisation is always changing and adjusting, never fixed, too elusive for analysis and precise description; essentially non-academic, And, more than that, any attempt to describe improvisation must be, in some respects, a misrepresentation, for there is something central to the spirit of voluntary improvisation which is opposed to the aims and contradicts the idea of  documentation.  My purpose in undertaking such an unlikely project as, firstly, instigating a series of radio programmes in which practising musicians from different idioms discussed their use of improvisation, and then assembling a book combining these programmes and further discussions with these and other players, was to show the significance of improvisation through the experience of those who use it. My feeling was that there was an important part of improvisation not easily indicated or conveyed by its results, a part which perhaps only those involved in doing it seemed to be able to appreciate or comprehend. This suspicion arose mainly as a result of the almost total absence of comment concerning improvisation and the hopeless misconceptions usually expressed in the comment which does occur.  Defined in any one of a series of catchphrases ranging from ‘making it up as he goes along’ to ‘instant composition’, improvisation is generally viewed as a musica! conjuring trick, a doubtful expedient, or even a vulgar habit. So in this book the intention is to present the views on improvisation of those who use it and know it.  Obviously this is not intended as a history of improvisation, a task which, if it were ever attempted, would be a vast and probably endless undertaking. Even about its presence in Occidental music, the most inhospitable area for improvisation, E.T.Ferand in his Improvisation in Nine Centuries of Western Music can write: ‘This joy in improvising while singing and playing is evidenc in almost all phases of music history. Jt was always a powerful force in the creation of new forms and every historical study that confines itself to the practical or theoretical sources that have come down to us in writing or in print, without taking into account the improvisational element in living musical practice, must of necessity present an incomplete, indeed a distorted picture. For there is scarcely a single field in music that has remained unaffected by improvisation, scarcely a single musical technique or form of composition that did not originate in improvisatory practice or was not essentially influenced by it. The whole history of the development of music is accom- panied by manifestations of the drive to improvise.”  So the omissions, those musics which have to be excluded in order to avoid the book assuming encyclopedic proportions, would make an extensive list. Ie would include many parts of Islamic music (notably Persian 4 the blues, Turkish music, many African musics, the Polynesian ‘variable’ musics" and all the many forms of vocal improvisation found in settings as culturally different as the Presbyterian chapels of Stornoway? and the markets and bazaars of Cairo, Those and many other forms of music involving the use of improvisation ate not here.  However, it did become increasingly clear during my contacts with different musicians and their musics that the main characteristics of improvisa- tion could be discerned in ail its appearances and roles. What could be said about improvisation in one area could be said about it in another. I hope | have managed to avoid doing that. f have tried, in fact, to use the different sections not only to present an account of improvisation in that area or idiom but to highlight a characteristic most obviously demonstrated by that area. For instance, the section on Indian music examines the usual method of learning co improvise, Flamenco deals with improvisation and authenticity, the chapters on church organ playing present something of the scholastic attitude co improvisation, and so on,  The musics covered here have been chosen simply because | had the opportunity to talk to an active practitioner from each of those fields. } couldn’t imagine a meaningful consideration of improvisation from anything other than a practical and a personal point of view. For there is no general or widely held theory of improvisation and ] would have thought it self-evident that improvisation has no existence outside of its practice. Among improvising musigans there is endless speculation about its nature but only an academic would have the temerity to mount a theory of improvisation. And even they can run into serious difficulties. Ella Zonis in her book Classical Perstan Music,  Mer: that ‘Persian music theorists, considering improvisation to be do not consider it in their writings’, ignores the warning and plunges in. ‘A further obstacle in this area is the readily apparent discrepancy between  1 Tha proseaurs of veniaron isone el the oldest and mos! persistent ol performing principles, being present wihaut ntertuplion from tho earkest known musics 19 the present day, Early voval an instrumental mpromsaton, while might take the form of ombellshment, was rot used merely o aller what akcady existed bul as a means of calabralng the act cl musie- making ik was an end init. the means of expression open othe performer The vomposiion sioud or fll onwhlher or acl penvidad a goad vehicle foe imprasauion  2 Tho collective improvisation ey tha congragetions of these chapels has been casctibed as ‘elaborate metismate around an oxtigmely Slow moving seircal pseim lune, en astonishing Sound, but cImost impossible ‘a learn, Gne has !o uniearn the temivered scale to begin wth, fe say nathing et one's sence of whal is Masrmonically propor" (Michae! Olvor na letter fo the author)  the theory of practice and the practice of practice. Not infrequently, after a lengthy interview regarding performance practices a petformer will illustrate the aspects of practice he has just described by playing something entirely different from what he has just said ought to be played. One must realise from the beginning that in Persian music there is no ‘always’, for no rule or custom is inviolable.’ After examining the various structures and constituents in Persian. music she later concludes: ‘After considering all these procedures, however, we must admit that the performer is not bound by them. For, in Persian music, the essential factors in a performance are the feeling of a player and those of his audience. At the actual time of performance, the musician does not calculate the procedures thar will guide his playing. Rather he plays from a level of consciousness somewhat removed from the purely rational... Under these conditions the player performs not according to the “theory of practice”, but intuitively, according to the “practice of practice”, wherein the dictates of traditional procedures are integrated with his immediate mood and emotional needs.’ | hope it will be adequate if | refer to the ‘practice of practice’ as practice, In any event, that is whar this book is mainly about.  There are no so-called ‘musical examples’ quoted. Transcription, itseems to me,far from being an aid to understanding improvisation, deflects attention towards peripheral considerations. In fact there is very little technical description of any kind, simply because almost all the musicians I spoke to chose to discuss improvisation mainly in ‘abstract’ terms. In fact there was a commonly held suspicion that a close technical approach was, for this subject, uninformative. In general, intuitive descriptions were preferred and, as Thomas Clifton says: ‘The question is not whether the description is subjective, objective, biased or idiosyneratic, but very simply is whether or not the description says something significant about the intuited experience so that the experience itself becomes something from which we can learn and in so doing learn about the object of that experience as well... No one is saying thar any particular intuitive description, taken as true, is the whole truth. Intuitive descriptions ereet their structures vety much in the same way that scientific descriptions do: slowly, methodically with frequent erasures and backtrack- ing. Both kinds of description are concerned with intersubjective confirmation,’  T have used the terms ‘idiomatic’ and ‘non-idjomatic’ to describe the two main forms of improvisation. Idiomatic improvisation, much the most widely used, is mainly concerned with the expression of an idiom - such as jazz, flamenco or baroque - and takes its identity and motivation from that idiom,  2. From “Some comparisons between intulive and seiantiic Cescriptons of music”. Thomas Giten in Jcumat af Music Theory Non-idiomatic improvisation has other concerns and is most usually found in so-called ‘free’ imaprovisation and, while it can be highly stylised, is not usually tied to representing an idiomatic identity. [ have also followed what seems to be the usual practice in writings about ‘straight’ music, of treating the contemporary as a special, quite segregated musical activity. Here one finds ‘specialists’ in ‘new’ music as though music, in order to be norma) and unspecialised, has to be a sort of sonic archaeology.  The word improvisation is actually very little used by improvising musicians. Idiomatic improvisors, in describing what they do, use the name of the idiom. They ‘play flamenco’ or ‘play jazz’; some refer to what they do as just ‘playing’. There is a noticeable reluctance to use the word and some improvisors express a positive dislike for it. I think this is due to its widely accepted connotations which imply that improvisation is something without preparation and without consideration, a completely ad hoc activity, frivolous and inconsequential, lacking in design and method. And they object to that implication because they know from their own experience that it is untrue. They know that there is no musical activity which requires greater skill and devotion, preparation, training and commitment. And so they reject the word, and show a reluctance to be identified by what in some quarters has become almost a term of abuse. They recognise that, as it is generally understood, it completely misrepresents the depth and complexity of their work. Bur ! have chosen to retain that term throughout this book; firstly because I don’t know of any other which could effectively replace it, and secondly because I hope that we, the other contributors and myself, might be able to redefine it.  xt  Introduction to revised edition  ‘The difference between the present musical climate and that of the mid-1970s, when this book was first written, could hardly be greater. Most surveys of the intervening decade and a half tend to be lamentations on the galloping artistic cowardice, shrivelled imaginations and self-congratulatory philistinism which typified the period, Other assessors, applauding the strenuous efforts evident in all areas of music to be more ‘accessible’, speak of a Golden Age. Either way, and significant as they are, the changes that have taken place seem to have made very little difference to improvisation. Transient musical fashion, of course, is unlikely to have any effect on something as fundamental as the nature of improvisation but even in its practice improvisation seems to have been, if at times diverted, as prevalent and irrepressible as ever.  Essential changes to the book, then, were only rarely necessary and revision has mainly taken the form of additions; new voices appearing, some for no more than a single remark, others in extended interviews.  Turning once again from improvising to writing about improvisation was done reluctantly; they are very different activities, it seems to me, and not always compatible. Writing did provide, however, the opportunity to look at the whole thing again through other peoples’ eyes, an instructive experience and one intensified this time because I was simultaneously working on a series of TV films based on the earlier edition of this book. That brought its own revelations, ag much about television as about improvisation, and while not everything covered in the programmes is of relevance here - TV making its own, highly specialised demands - a number of quotations from the discussions held around and during filming are included. Mosc useful, though, was the opportunity once again to make contact with some of the endlessly various approaches towards improvisation and to be able to further draw on the wealth of insight and practical experience available in virtually all musics as testimony to this bedrock of musical creativity.  Derek Batley, London, September 1991  xiti  PART ONE  INDIAN MUSIC  (1)  Hindustani (North Indian) and Carnatic (South Indian) music are usually considered as two quite distinct musical areas with differences in nomencla- ture, style and musical grammar. The division in many ways reflects the different cultural and political history of the two areas: South India with its relatively undisturbed Hindu culture producing a music very heavily tied co tradition, conservative in outlook, proud of its rigorous conformity to Sanscrit texts, and earlier saint/composers; Hindustani music, coming from an area which has seen 4000 years of almost continuous invasion and migration beginning with the Aryans and finishing, hopefully, with the English, naturally enough reflects the syntheses it has undergone and is less restricted by inherited convention, although a marked respect for tradition is a prominent part of all Indian music. One effect of this division is that there is a much heavier emphasis on improvisation to be found in Hindustani than in Carnatic music. And the type of attitude customarily associated with improvisation — experimental, tolerant of change, with an interest in development — is much more readily found in the music of the North than that of the South. But in practice, the presence of improvisation is of central importance to all Indian music,  One of the effects of the collision between the Islamic and Hindu cultures occurring in Northern India was to produce a music of a less specifically religious nature than thac in the South. A shifting of attention from the traditional texts to the more purely musical side leads to a less rigid, more adventurous attitude in Hindustani music. But historically and theoretically, all Indian music is embedded in the spititual life of the country. The principles of the music are spiritual principles, the laws of the music are spiritual laws and their authority is of a religious nature. Aesthetics and devotional thinking are inextricably connected. A history of Indian music is largely a catalogue of Hindu and Muslim saints, their teachings and their deeds; a book of musical theory is indistinguishable from a book of religious instcuction and although there is a large body of literatute concerning the music there is an almost complete absence of systematised, purely musical theory  The implications and effects of this on the spiritual life of the musician must, of course, be great, and could certainly be considered as belonging within the scope of the subject of this book but it seems to me that one of the  most striking advantages that this background has to confer on the Indian musician is of a secular nature. What he is saved from is the burden of having his music constantly monitored by a self-appointed theoretical authority of doubtful utility and, as regards the business of actually playing the music, he is left with enormous practical freedom. In short, the purely theoretical advice he receives is almost entirely of an aesthetic not technical nacure. For the development of his musicianship the student in Indian music is left with no alternative but to find practical instruction from a performing musician and, with guidance from his master, to pursue his own personal development and musical self-sufficiency.  The framework within which improvisation takes place in Indian music is the raga, a variable framework. The basic intervals used, the sruti and the svara, and the rhythmic cycle, the tala, are also variable. Consequently, the main raw materials used by the Indian musician are of an unfixed, malleable nature. Improvisation for him is a fact of musical life.  THE SRUTI  In Sanscrit meaning ‘to hear’, the sruti is the smallest interval used and is considered the most important single element in Indian music. Its exact size is elusive. The octave in Indian music is divided into seven main, unequal units called svaras. The sruti is the subdivision of the svara and its relation to the svara can be 2:1,3:1o0r4;1, thatis, a sruti can bea half ova third or a quarter of the svara, an interval which itself does not have a clearly defined size. The octave, however, does have an exact size and there are 22 srutis to an octave. Again these divisions are not equal.  Arguing about the exact size of the sruti, in any of its versions, seems to have been one of the main tasks of the theorist in this music for over 2000 years, In practice ic is clear that a micro-tonal music which is often played on instruments using low-tensioned strings, where most small movement is by glissandi, means that the exact size of the sruti is in many instances purely a matter of personal choice, a choice depending on the musician’s knowledge, experience and instinct. The difference between one raga and another can be decided by the size of one sruti, but in practice this is always judged in the context of the raga being played, judged in relation to a svara, and judged aurally. But srutis, too, can be considered as the elemeat which guarantees the basic variability of che music; a constant shifting to ‘sharpness’ or to ‘flatness’. The precise opposite of the tempered scale.  Since the arrival on the scene of the Western musicologist the debate about the sruti has intensified. One French scholar, after awesome research, concluded that there were 24, not 22, srutis co the octave. I found an adequate description of the importance and function of the stuti in the work of two Indian writers who were largely unconcerned with precise measurements and exact labels. R.Srinivasan in Facets of Indian Culture, writes: ‘It is the use of these very short intervals that makes the individuality of the Indian sys- tem...the spirit of a Raga or a melody-type is best expressed through the use of these minute divisions of the scale. The expertness of a musician depends to a large extent on his capacity to use them so as to add to the richness and sweetness of his songs.’ For a more ‘technical’ description Shri N.M.Adyonthaya in his Melody Music of India offers that ‘a further explanation of the basis of the srutis may be found in the audio phenomenon that when two notes of the same pitch are struck simultaneously and one of them is raised gradually higher and higher in pitch relationship or pitch ratio, one of them serving as a basic note of reference, the ear responds and tolerates at certain definite points and there are 22 such points at each of which the degree of tolerance, consonance or dissonance is varying. These 22 points have been the basis of the 22 srutis of Indian music from time immemorial.”  THE SVARA  The seven unequal and variable divisions of the octave, usually compared to a scale, have been more accurately described as the molecular structure of the raga. Although they provide the main tonal points, their identity is not established primarily by their relationship to a tonic and their use is not step- like or sequential. One of the meanings of ‘svara’ is ‘self-sufficient’.  ‘The svara and the sruti form the two basic pitch divisions in Indian music —a music which is, in the Western sense, non-harmonic. The notes relate to each other purely by their continuity and their juxtaposition. A svara is selected and used as a centre around which melodic activity can take place. Most of this activity is in srutis acting as sareltites of the svara. The whole of the activity can take place over a continuous drone or fundamental. If a singer is taking part in the performance the drone, or shadja, is chosen by the singer and all the instruments tune to that, If there is no singer any player of a melody instrument will choose it.  THE TALA  The tala, which in Sanscrit means the palm of the hand, is the rhythmic cycle over which the second part of the raga is played and is treated mainly as a base for rhythmic variations of fixed metrical length, for example 16, 12, or 8 matra  (beats); the sub-division of this cycle can become quite complex. Although there are probably over one hundred tala available to the Indian musician there are only about a dozen in general use. The tala is, of course, an integral part, one of the main characteristics, of Indian music but of more importance rhythmically is the /aya.  THE LAYA  An important part of all idiomatic improvisation is using the ‘fec!” of the thythm, the forward movement sense as opposed to the mathematical understanding of the rhythm. In Indian music this is the laya. Usually described as the overall tempo of a piece, it is much more than that. It is irs rhythmic impetus, its pulse. The musician who displays an exceptional rhythmical ‘feel’, whose work has great rhythmic facility and ease, is described as ‘having a good laya’. The origin of the word is connected with the Hindu belief in the ‘all- embracing comprehensive rhythm of the universe as personified in Shiva, Lord of the Dance’.  The vocabulary of Western classical music contains no equivalent for laya, either being incapable of recognising its existence or preferring to ignore it. Probably che terms encountered in the description of space and energy serve better: continuum, kinetic, dynamic, equivalence, ballistic, centrifugal. Or — like those coined in Western improvisation: groove, swing, rock, ride— words of sexual derivation. The Indians say: ‘The laya is the father and the sruti is the mother of the raga.”  The framework within which these elements are working, the raga, is as adaptable and as malleable as they are; not in any way imprecise or unclear in its intentions and requirements, but having the strength and resourcefulness to adapt to any musical direction.  THE RAGA  Until its performance the raga is unformed. It isa set of ingredients all of which are themselves variable and cut of which the musician must fashion his performance, his interpretation of these elements. The elements that can be fixed, such as the sthaya, the first statement of any melody which might be used at the beginning of the gar, and some of the decorative phrases (gamakas) are used voluntarily and, if used, the placing and phrasing is chosen at the moment of performance. As with most of the terms used in Indian music there is an ambiguity about the raga which makes a precise definition always, in some respects, misleading. But one can make a generalised description. It is, firstly, an ascending and descending series of svaras, a specific collection of notes which do not, on their own, establish the identity of the raga; one particular  row of svaras can be common to more than one raga. The distinction might be in how the svaras are treated, how they are approached, how they are ordered or grouped, how they are left, which svara is selected for emphasis (vadi).  The raga is also the framework within which the musician improvises. Itis divided into two halves. The first, the alapa, forms an out-of-tempo slow introduction. The second, the gat, is played over the tala, the rhythmic cycle, and the characteristic material of the raga is treated in various standard ways.  The two halves are further sub-divided but there are many versions of how many sub-divisions there should be. However it is fairly standard in practice that the following sequences take place:  THE ALAPA  The svaras to be used are established and the dominating notes selected. At this point there is no tala. Melodic patterns are established and the pace quickens. A pulse is introduced but no tala.  THE GAT  The raga melody is stated and the tala introduced. There is movement into a higher register, the introduction of set decorative pieces, and a concentration on the rhythmic properties of the performance. Dialogue between the performers increases in intensity and pace.  This outline is probably used, wholly or in abbreviation, in most performances but my impression is that there is no shortage of exceptions.  So a raga provides the material, certain standard ways of treating the material, and the framework for the performance. There are also many decorations and graces which are standardised. But the whole thing is in flux, achieving its final state only at the moment of performance. One further point, something common to most improvised music, is that different constituents do not have obvious hierarchical values. Anything which can be considered as decoration, for instance, is not in some way subservient to that which it decorates. The most powerful expression of the identity of a piece might be in the smallest details.  Finally, concerning the raga, O.C.Gangoly in Ragas and Raginis writes: “A raga is more than its physical form...its body. It has a soul which comes to dwell and inhabit the body. In the language of Indian poetics this soul — this principle — is known as the Rasa, or flavour, its sentiment, its impassioned feeling.’  eee  Representing Indian music in the programmes was Viram Jasani. Born in Jaipur in North India where he studied with Imrat Khan, younger brother of Vilyat Khan, Viram Jasani now lives in England. He gave me the following account of the raga. As he talked he played the sitar, demonstrating the different points he was making. With him was the tabla player Esmail Sheikh. Quite a simple description, it is a succinct account of the essentials involved, even without the musical examples. The points at which these took place are indicated in the text by ellipses.  When we start a performance of the raga we start very slowly, We play what is called alapa. And the purpose of alapa is to explore the melodic possibilities within that raga, which has nothing to do with rhythm or style. And the first thing we do is to establish the keynote... This can be done with a drone or just by playing a phrase up the keynote... Then the improvisations take place in the lower register... And here you do in fact apply a simple mathematical process. But not all of these possibilities may be allowed in the raga. You've got to decide which ones are allowed and which ones to play and how to play them. And you take out one note...and concentrate on that one note... And in this way you work your way up the scale. The whole thing is then repeated on the basis of a rhythm created, in this case on the sitar, on the drone... And concentrating on this note...and building up my phrases to end on that point... And you pick out each note in this scale as you go up the scale and your phrases are created and improvised around each particular note, and this is why it takes such a long time, perhaps, to play a good performance. Novw all this is done without any rhythm whatever. Where the drums come in, and this is where improvisation perbaps begins to get a little less, is where one has a fixed composition — one can either make up a composition or you can play a traditional tune from your style of music; one which your teacher is famous for, perhaps, And this tune may bave a certain length in time, and there is an emphasised point in that tune which corresponds to the emphasised point in the time cycle. And we both meet on that point... And while I repeat this tune over and over I am maintaining this time cycle, which leaves the tabla player, the drummer, free to improvise, while the time cycle is still being maintained. If we just have an example of him playing and he will come back and end his improvisations at the same point of emphasis... Then he maintains the cycle and I am free to improvise, and we alternate; and this is where one tends to play much faster phrases, which may seem a contradiction, to its slower atmosphere. But that’s Indian music. Full of contradiction, I am afraid.  INDIAN MUSIC  Q)  The learning process in improvisation is invaciably difficult to detect, Although a large number of books and courses offering instruction and advice on how to improvise are available it seems impossible to find a musician who has actually learned to improvise from therm. The great majority of these studies concern themselves either with organ improvisation, the earliest of which appeared over 200 years ago, or conventional jazz. And the instruction offered usually concerns the manipulation of scalar and harmonic ingredients in those particular styles. What they have to say is, in most cases, helpful for an appreciation of those idioms and, naturally, an understanding of the idiom is essential in order to improvise in it. But a discourse which concerns itself exclusively with pitch relationships - melodic or harmonic — can say practically nothing about that which is essentially to do with improvisation,  In the face of the possibility that no improvisor anywhere has ever learned to improvise from a book or other documentary source, the argument usually offered to support the publication of these manuals is that while ‘great’ players can somehow suddenly appear fully endowed with every necessary skill, more ordinary players have to find more ordinary means. The truth is probably that improvisation is learned — perhaps acquired would be a better word ~ in pretty much the same way by everybody who is lucky enough to stumble on the right method. An ability to improvise can’t be forced and it depends, firstly, on an understanding, developed from complete familiarity, of the musical context in which one improvises, or wishes to improvise. As this understanding develops so the ability to improvise can develop. The important thing is to have an objective, the recognition of which can be intuitive, so strongly desired as to be almost a mania. In idiomatic improvisation this objective is usually repres- ented by an admired player whose performance one wishes to emulate. In the early stages this admiration is most useful if it takes the form of unquestioning idolatry. Alain Danielou, writing of the traditional method of learning in South-East Asia, says: ‘In this sort of personal instruction artistic training precedes the technical. The pupil is in constant contact with the work of art in its most developed form and he is conscious of the goal which he should eventually attain: the content of the music is never separated from its form.’ Later the path to musical self-development comes through increasing confi- dence and the inevitable increase in critical awareness.  Most musicians learn to improvise by accident; or by a series of observed accidents; by trial and error. And there is of course an appropriateness about this method, a natural correspondence between improvisation and empiricism. Learning improvisation is a practical matter: there is no exclusively theoretical side to improvisation. Appreciating and understanding how improvisation works is achieved through the failures and successes involved in attempting to do it. Indian music with its long complex relationship between teacher and pupil has the only methodology or system which acknowledges these basic characteristics of improvisation.  Viram Jasani described to me how improvisation ‘arrived’ during his years of study.  The time that we spend with a Guru ts purely spent in trying to understand the framework in which Indian music is set. And a Guru doesn’t, or your teacher doesn’t, really tell you how to improvise. That is purely up to the student to gain by experience and to intuit the various methods of playing the music. What he directly learns from his teacher is the framework in which improvisation or performance of Indian music takes place. But the teacher in Indian music is not usually an academic, he’s not a theoretician, therefore a good teacher is able to show you and give you guidelines as to how to perform Indian classical music. He gives you the scope and the field in which to gain your experience and if you're a good student you take advantage of this Opportunity that he gives you and then it becomes something that one develops on one's own.  Could Viram Jasani be more specific about his teacher’s methods and could he recall his first attempts at improvising?  It’s difficult to pinpoint a particular time when you start improvising. What happens ts that your teacher, when he’s in the mood to teach you a particular raga, won't say to you, ‘this is the scalic structure of the raga and these are the notes used in that raga’ — what he will do is to play to you and tell you to listen and perhaps ask you to imitate certain phrases that he is playing. And gradually, after bearing him do this several times, what you do is to acquire a feeling for that raga and you can immediately recognise it when it’s played by other musicians or by your teacher again. And so you start playing those phrases and eventually you get to the stage where you don’t repeat the phrases your teacher has taught you, you start creating your own different phrases within that raga. And you intuit when you're playing a phrase which is out of context, out of that framework. In other words, when you learn a raga you are really learning something which is very abstract and you don’t learn a raga in terms of its tonal content.  Viram Jasani demonstrated what he meant.  VI play a few phrases within this raga, without any direct...implication as to how one actually improvises in this raga but just to demonstrate to you how to feel for the raga and then I'll at one point deliberately play something which you will automatically recognise as not part of the raga — just to show the power of the raga and how you immediately realise that something is not correct...  This almost uses the same intonation...one note is incorrect...that is, as you would say, the natural seventh, which should have been the flattened seventh. Now your teacher doesn’t tell you that these are the notes that you use so that you know which ones not to use. What be does is to play you phrases and play you the general...give you an idea of the gait of the raga...bow it should be played. There are plenty of..awhat we call meend or slides, between notes. And there is more empbasis...on the lower notes in the lower register. This all goes to make up an atmosphere of sobriety, of austerity. But ultimately I don’t think musicians think in terms like these. They are musicians and they think of the feeling they have for the notes, and the feeling that they derive from the notes.  Because we are learning, if you like, a language of music, it comes naturally to us to think of our own phrases and our own representation of a performance of a raga.  Ours is a very intuitive music, you learn intuitively, the feeling for a raga is acquired intuitively.  I suggested to Viram Jasani that one of the purposes of improvisation might be to intensify the mood of a raga.  That's absolutely right. To bring out the most in that raga. In purely mathematical terms a series of notes can be combined in hundreds of different ways. But it’s useless in your improvisation to go through all of these. Theoretically it might be correct but it doesn’t allow for the feelings of the vaga, it doesn’t allow for music.  One has to figure out a way in which the possibilities of that raga will enhance its mood.  And, of course, a raga can be considered a limiting thing. How, after all, do you recognise a raga? Because you recognise certain characteristic features about it. And if you are going to play that raga you can’t help but play those characteristic features. So this, perhaps, is not improvisation, But your improvisation comes into play when you are trying to use the information presented to you in terms of musical facts, using your ability, and the experience acquired over the years of practicing that raga, and listening to other people play that raga, to put all this together and create some new phrase OF put a net idea within that raga.  When asked how he judged the quality of an improvisation, what made one improvisation better than another, Viram Jasani, like most improvising musicians, couldn’t offer a formula or a set of rules that one could apply.  It’s the combination achieved by: tempo — what’s happened before — what's going to come after — the tone of the instrument — the particular tone you bring out of the instrument at that time ~ the mood created — perhaps a phrase which isn't necessarily new but just put in a different context.  lasked Viram Jasani if there was any deliberate attempt at some sort of evolution in his improvising — whether over the years he was actually trying to move it somewhere.  That is, in fact, how ragas evolve. Because a musician is trying to use whatever liberty he bas within the raga to extend the limits of that raga without destroying its basic features. And if you take a raga today and look at it in terms of its history you may find that it bas changed considerably. But it is changed not by one performer but by a succession of performers. So the changes are imperceptible over any short pertod of time. They become part of the raga. | think a raga is a product of time and people playing that raga over a period of time. It’s a product of peoples’ changing attitudes and tolerances.  Something common to most musics im which improvisation is tradi- tionally found is an absence of any accurate notation system. Gart Sachs in The Weilsprings of Music writes: ‘...music without notation is not limited to scriptless societies. Many ancient notations were merely devised by priests for priests and cantors and some were even kept secret. While in religious music notation had a definite place in order to prevent the present and future generations from breaking sacred traditions, secular music relied on free invention and memory, in Western civilisation as well as those of the East. Notation became indispensible only under the pressure of worked-out polyphony.’  “Written music’ in Indian music usually refers to books of music theory (accepted as being quite separate from music practice, the one rarely interfering with the other). Consequently, instruction has to be aural, by rote, and personal. But there are other implications to the lack of written music.  Whether reading music is a disadvantage to an improvisor is a question which gets quite a lot of discussion amongst improvising musicians who work in areas such as popular music, where they might be expected both to improvise and to read music. The argument usually revolves around the point whether the skills and attitudes necessary to be a good sight-reader are, or are not, inhibiting factors when it comes to improvisation. There is an unmistak- able suspicion that the acquisition of reading skills in some way has a blunting effect on improvising skills, an acceptance that these are very often two things  10  which do not go together. So, of course, in musics where there isn’t an ‘accurate’ notation system, that possible problem, or distraction, disappears, But more important than the removal of a possible inhibition or contrary discipline from the performer is the fact that the absence of a music writing/ reading tradition gets rid of the composer.  Writings of a spiritual and of an aesthetic nature or poems which have inspired musicians are the only types of scripted works which are allowed to influence and affect the Indian performing musician. In practice the only part of the music which might be identified as ‘composed music’ is the possible use of certain melodies with certain ragas. Written by, or associated with, historic figures of Indian music, usually great performers or religious teachers of the past, their use, once a symbolic act of piety, is now.a matter of musical choice. The ragas, the bedrock and stuff of the music, develop and evolve through the type of process described earlier by Viram Jasani. One of the few sustained efforts to deliberately mould or shape the course of the music has been the attempt in recent years to synthesise or combine different ragas. But here again the experiments are carried out by performers and receive their ‘tests’ in  performance.  So, as with all improvisors, there is an assumption by the player that the music is his; his creation, his presentation, his responsibility. I had this exchange with Viram Jasani:  Does the amount of improvisation used increase as you go on? Would it be possible to say that?  I don’t understand what you mean when you say ‘amount of improvisa- tion used’.  Would you introduce more of your own...  The whole thing is one’s own...the whole performance is one’s own interpretation on that raga.  Improvisors in all fields often speak of ‘my music’. It is not a claim of ownership but a complete personal identification with the music they play. They, ‘the musicians’, are the embodiment of the music. And in India, where, as Yehudi Mehuhin says, ‘...music has continued unperturbed through thirty centuries or more, with the even pulse of a river and with the unbroken evolution of a Sequoia tree’, the continuance and evolution of their music has throughout the centuries been the successful charge of the improvising performer.  it 